
1. Emotional and rational elements in decision making


Smart ways to inject emotion into your marketing message
● Prompt your prospect to imagine how good it will feel to save time and personal effort by using your product or service.
● Use pictures and colors to elicit an emotional response.
● Point out the painful situation your target can avoid by adopting your product (see Chapter 2 on loss aversion).
● Make your customer feel special or superior because they use your product (see Chapter 3 on scarcity).
● Proactively help your prospect before asking them to buy (see Chapter 4 on reciprocity).
● Emphasize that your prospect will be making a popular choice that no one will blame them for (see Chapter 5 on social proof).
● Tell the story of how someone became a workplace hero thanks to your product or service (see Chapter 6 on storytelling).
● Focus on the experience of owning or using your product, along with its features and benefits.


EXAMPLE (End-user emotion)
The winning campaign - It injected serious, end-user emotion. It talked about the kinds of data-driven decisions that the target had to make every day, the kind that affected their employees’ livelihoods and their company’s profit margins. It acknowledged this might make the target feel a little panicked; that they might feel incredible pressure to get things right. It
suggested this could lead to second-guessing and sleepless nights. With headlines like “The delete button for that voice in your head,” the emotion in this campaign connected with the prospect. And then it presented the product as the thing that would make the target feel confident and protected from making the wrong call.


  





In both B2C and B2B, your goal is to create an emotional connection in your marketing.
Paint a picture of what it’s like to experience the product or service. 
Show the problem you’re solving or the goal you’re helping someone to achieve.
For example, you won’t just install a burglar alarm, you’ll help your customer feel confident their family is safe. You won’t just provide public speaking instruction, you’ll help someone crush their next presentation.
Choose words that help people envision the outcome you offer. 
Set the scene, acknowledge your audience’s fears, struggles, dreams or desires, and then bring your solution to life.


How hot-state decision making may help you sell more
The Snickers candy bar campaign that demonstrated “you’re not yourself when you’re hungry” is a good example of this.


Here are a few ways you can use hot-state decision making to spur sales
● Send an email with a spin the wheel reward game offering the chance to win a deal on your product or service.
● Run a “scratch to reveal an instant discount” promotion, either in print or online.
● Issue an exclusive, time-limited code that customers must enter on your
website to get a special gift or price.


Providing the reasons to buy is crucial if you hope to close the sale. For example, if you paint a picture of how wonderful owning your product will feel, but don’t disclose the price, you can easily fail.


KEY TAKEAWAYS
1) Emotion drives action.
2) Include both emotional and rational reasons in your marketing messages. Your target needs both.
3) People will use the emotional reasons to decide and the rational ones to justify those decisions, to themselves and to others.
4) Your target’s brain will process emotional messages faster. Those messages will also focus attention and aid memory.
5) Inject emotion into your marketing by using imagery, loss aversion, scarcity, reciprocity, social proof, and storytelling.
6) ­Emotion is needed even in B2B marketing, and even for highly educated audiences.
7) Forging an emotional connection, or triggering an emotional hot state, makes it easier for you to persuade people.
8) Don’t just focus on the features and benefits of your product or service; help your target feel what it’s like to experience them.
9) Show images of people enjoying or benefiting from what you sell to trigger mirror neurons.
10) Even considered purchases benefit from including emotional reasons to buy.




2. Conveying customer benefits through loss aversion and the endowment effect


We rush to tell people all the things we think are wonderful. We want them to have all the details—all the information that is important to us. However, sometimes what our target market is looking for is not always what we insist on telling them. We need to focus on what they want to hear, not necessarily on all we want to say. 
For example, they may not be interested in how the company was founded. Or its history. Or that there are many other divisions with many other products. Or even that the company strives hard to try to keep customers happy. Even if these things seem important to the marketer or to the marketer’s internal constituents, they may not be what’s motivating to your prospects.


Do not discount benefits. But remember to inject a little negativity into your marketing messages. Tell people what they’re missing out on, or what they stand to lose if they don’t do what you ask them to.


Is there anything better than benefits? Consider loss aversion


Since people are more motivated to avoid losses than to realize gains, you may wonder if your marketing messages should continue to be exclusively positive. The answer I would offer is no—not every message, not every time.
They shouldn’t always be all about the benefits and all about the gains. In fact, it can actually benefit you to make your messaging a little “negative.” You don’t want to completely walk away from the benefits, of course. But you do want to get a little loss aversion working for you.


A number of clients I’ve had the pleasure to work with have upon occasion asked me to rewrite something so it sounds more positive. For example, instead of saying “never,” say “always.” Or instead of saying “lose,” say “gain.” However, after they discovered the behavioral science behind loss aversion, they usually changed their minds.


People buy travel insurance because they are afraid they’ll lose all their money if their trip gets derailed. They buy a backup pair of their favorite jeans because they are afraid they won’t be able to replace them later if something should happen to them. They buy a spare key and hide it because they are afraid they’ll lock themselves out.


And it doesn’t stop there. Have you ever chosen a more expensive item instead of its entry-level alternative because you were afraid the less expensive one wouldn’t be as good? Have you ever gone with the more costly brand name product because you were afraid the generic one would fail to perform? Fear doesn’t just drive sales. It can drive more expensive sales (Zaltman, 2003).








Easy ways to use loss aversion in your marketing 
● Indicate how many of an item are left in stock. You’ve probably seen hotels and airlines flag that there are only a few rooms or seats still available at the quoted price. Other online retailers will warn prospective customers when the quantity of a certain product is running low or let them know that it previously sold out. 
● Tell people that an event may not be repeated, or that it won’t be in the target’s area again until the following year. Similarly, let people know that the event won’t be recorded, so there is no other way to catch it. 
● Or try the reverse. Encourage prospects to register for a webinar by telling them to sign up even if they are not sure they can attend, because you will send a link to the recording after the fact, so they won’t miss out. 
● Inform your customer or prospect that the offer you sent may not be sent to them again. 
● Allow people to preserve their options by telling them they can decide now and cancel later. Rather than having to make a yes or no decision that is final, they can postpone that decision which means that, at least for the moment, they haven’t lost anything. Often when people commit, they do not then go back and change their minds (see Chapter  8 on commitment and consistency). 
● Replace language such as “Take advantage of” or “Get in on” with “Don’t miss.” Those two little words can be just enough to trigger loss aversion. 
● Highlight deadlines and expiration dates. You can expect to see an increase in response close to them, as people rush to make sure they don’t miss out. 
● Offer a free trial. When something is free, it removes the fear of loss. As world-renowned behavioral economist Dan Ariely explains in his book Predictably Irrational, “there’s no visible possibility of loss when we choose a FREE! item.” 
● Frame your message in terms of loss instead of gain (see more in Chapter 12). For example, your ad headline, email subject line, or direct mail teaser copy could pose questions such as: How many dieting mistakes do you make? Will your car fail its annual inspection? What did you forget to pack? 
● Or you could use a declarative sentence that also leans toward loss. For example, your copy could state: Foods you should never eat before bedtime, this common error can cost you plenty, or you’re about to lose your chance.






Combine the endowment effect with loss aversion to trigger behavior
The endowment effect means people place more value on what they already own. Essentially “that people often demand much more to give up an object than they would be willing to pay to acquire it” (Kahneman et al, 1991).
As you can see, the endowment effect is closely related to loss aversion, in that the pain of giving up something we own drives up that price as compared to the price of acquiring it.


Seven ways to inject the endowment effect into your marketing messages 
● Tap into the IKEA Effect, a term Dan Ariely and Mike Norton use to describe the idea that “the more work you put into something, the more ownership you begin to feel for it,” such as assembling furniture from the Swedish retailer (Ariely, 2008). 
● Invite customers to become cocreators, offering them some ability to influence the end product they purchase, for example, by customizing the design or configuring the components from an available list. The more input they have, the more ownership they’ll feel. 
● Offer a free or discounted trial of your product or service. Once people begin to use it, they will start to think of it as theirs. This is even more true if in using it, they add data to it, such as playlists of music or contact details of friends. 
● Inform people who’ve subscribed to your e-newsletter but have stopped opening it that you’ll be removing them from your email list unless they begin to reengage. For some, perhaps those whose interests or responsibilities have changed, that may be fine. But others will react to keep what they think of as theirs. 
● Notify customers who have earned membership in a specific recognition tier that if their level of business declines, they will drop down to a lower tier and lose the benefits they currently enjoy
● When presenting options, lead with your most robust one. Once prospective customers read about everything included in it, they establish mental ownership. When they read about the next, less robust option, they will feel like they are losing benefits. 
● In Chapter 1, we discussed getting people to imagine owning your product or service because that could help them feel positively toward it. It can also trigger the endowment effect, whereby simply imagining ownership begins to feel to people like they do in fact own the item. As a result, they are reluctant to give it up. Similarly, offering a return policy or guarantee can prompt people to give a product a try, intending to return it if it doesn’t work out, but once they take possession, the endowment effect can kick in.


KEY TAKEAWAYS 
1) Benefits sell. But relying on them exclusively can cost a marketer response. 
2) Injecting some loss aversion into your messaging can be a powerful motivator. 
3) People are approximately twice as motivated to avoid the pain of loss as they are to achieve the pleasure of gain. 
4) Show people the pain your product or service can help people avoid, or the pain they may find themselves in if they do not purchase it. 
5) Fear is a hardwired emotion. Even people who are familiar with loss aversion can still feel afraid to lose out and therefore respond to it. 
6) Limited quantities and opportunities, deadlines and expiration dates, the ability to preserve options, and phrases such as “don’t miss” and “free” are effective ways to use loss aversion. 
7) Expressing things in the “negative,” or using a loss frame, can be more impactful than positive framing. 
8) When using loss aversion, be truthful and respect your audience. Pay off the concept in your messaging. And do not resort to clickbait. 
9) People value something that they own more than something they’ve yet to possess, a concept known as the endowment effect. 
10) The endowment effect is related to loss aversion because people want more money to give up or lose what they already have than they would be willing to pay to acquire that same thing.
11) Making people feel ownership by getting them to imagine possessing your product or service, inviting them to cocreate, offering trials or guarantees, and notifying them that they stand to lose something they currently have are all ways to use the endowment effect in your marketing.


















3. Creating urgency and exclusivity through the scarcity principle


Easy ways to add urgency to your marketing messages: 
● Pop deadlines and expiration dates when you have them. Response will increase as the deadline nears. 
● If you don’t have a hard and fast deadline, imply one. For example, use phrases such as: Please respond this week, reply requested in five days, or for a limited time only. 
● Show countdown clocks in your email, or on your landing pages and websites. Research from Worldata (2021) indicates a countdown clock in an email can increase your conversion rate by 22 percent. 
● Use words that reference time, such as now, today, tonight, tomorrow, minutes, hours, this week only, soon, dated contents enclosed, time’s running out, and right now. In fact, Worldata research (2020) shows that the words today, tomorrow, and days left used in an email subject line can lift opening rates by double-digit percentages. 
● Choose words that suggest speed, such as hurry, rush, immediate, instantly, don’t delay, don’t be disappointed, flash sale, and open at once.
  





● Write headlines, direct mail teaser copy, and subject lines with words that focus your reader, such as alert, attention, caution, and notice. 
● Combine urgency with loss aversion (see Chapter 2), and include language in your messaging that warns the offer may not be repeated, or that this is the only chance to take advantage of it, or that the offer may be withdrawn at any time. 
● Pop phrases such as last chance, final notice, reminder, and second attempt in key pieces of marcom real estate, such as email subject lines and direct mail Johnson boxes. 
● Flag items that are newly back in stock or expected to sell out, and events that are filling up fast or have only a few seats left. Also highlight items that are only available seasonally. For example, NPD Group reports restaurants find that “Seasonal LTO (limited time offer) buyers typically visit more and are more valuable customers to the chain overall.” 
● Add a clock or hourglass emoji to your subject line. Worldata (2021) has reported lifts in opening rates of 24 and 22 percent respectively when these appear in subject lines.
● Use language that references availability, such as limited quantities and while supplies last. 
● Indicate when other people are looking at the same item that has a finite quantity. 
● Restrict the number of items any one person can purchase. For example, state there is a one per person limit, a purchase limit of X, or a limit of one visit per week. In fact, researchers ran an experiment using a soup sale at a grocery store. When there was no limit to the number of cans of soup people could purchase at the discounted price, the average number bought was 3.3. However, when a limit of 12 was posted, the average sale increased to 7 cans (Wansink et al, 1998).




Never underestimate the psychological appeal of exclusivity
Proven ways to add exclusivity to your marketing messages: 
● Provide prospects with a VIP code or a personalized identification number that is associated with their special offer, and tell them not to share it with anyone else. 
● Offer them access to a phone number, landing page, or specific web pages that are reserved for certain members only. 
● Give them special discounts, upgrades, complimentary services, or free gifts. 
● Grant them early access, inside details, or a special preview for something that they care about or something you’re about to launch. Similarly, let them know they are entitled to express processing, complimentary shipping, faster response, or a similar service because of who they are. 
● Pepper your copy with words and phrases such as secret, a sneak peek, a behind the scenes look, the truth behind, the untold story, the real story, confessions of, what they don’t want you to know, what they won’t tell you, never before shared, not previously revealed, what very few people know, an insider account, and similar terms that suggest you have information they won’t find in other places. 
● Make your channel exclusive. In a webinar, Worldata (Worldata, 2020) reported that offers that are flagged as available only through email generate a 14 percent lift in open rates.
● Use language that makes people feel special, such as reserved for, only for, just for, especially for, private, select, not available to the general public, and not everyone, to underscore exclusivity. In fact, the subject line construction “Just for (fill in the blank)” drives a 17 percent increase in email open rates according to Worldata research. 
● Similarly, when describing products, use phrases that highlight scarcity, such as sourced from the top 1 percent, found only in one part of the world, and made from the highest quality, to set your offerings apart. When describing services, use phrases such as white-glove, concierge, customized, and best in class. 
● Additionally, inject exclusivity into your product or service descriptions by using language such as handcrafted, artisanal, craft, one-of-a-kind, collector’s item, special edition, limited edition, rare, not often seen, small batch, one of the few, award-winning, unique, and singular. 
● To emphasize that what you sell is better than the competition, choose phrases such as unlike other companies, uncommon in this category, unusual for, not typically available, and difficult to obtain. 
● Make your customer or prospect feel special by pointing out they’ve been selected, chosen, pre-approved, or that the usual requirements have been waived for them. Remind them that although they qualify, not everyone does, that this is a member-only benefit, that they are one of only a certain number of people that are eligible, that they have already been accepted, or that they are invited. 
● Choose empowering verbs that speak to exclusivity, such as you’ve earned, you’ve unlocked, you’ve achieved, you’ve been granted, and you’ve gained. 
● When laying out your proposition, invite people to be one of the few or to be among the first, or to get the product or service before anyone else or before their friends. 
● Create customer tiers, groups, and categories with desirable sounding labels, like silver, gold, and platinum, and congratulate your target on obtaining this advanced status. Similarly, offer charter memberships or membership in private groups. 
● Send your target special recognition like membership cards, badges, and icons they can display. 
● Personalize your messages by the recipient’s name or their initials, or by their expressed interests or previous behaviors, so that your message feels exclusive to them.


Other examples of messaging that combine both halves of the scarcity principle include: 
● New limited-edition SUV expected to sell out this week. 
● Respond by to be among the first to experience this advanced level of luxury. 
● Last chance: Special preview reserved just for you. 
● Member-only pricing expires in 24 hours. 
● Gain early access with your VIP code this week only. 
● You won’t find this level of service anywhere else. But only two openings remain. 
● Only five artist-signed limited edition prints available.








KEY TAKEAWAYS 
1) People want what they cannot have. 
2) Things that are scarce are perceived to be more valuable and desirable. 
3) The scarcity principle has two sides—urgency and exclusivity. 
4) Urgency, expressed in the form of limited quantities and limited times, motivates people to take action. 
5) Marketers can employ urgency in their communications by using deadlines, countdown clocks, and restricted quantities, as well as by using timereferencing words such as today, now, last, etc, speed-referencing words such as rush and immediate, and availability-referencing phrases such as limited quantities, back in stock, while supplies last, etc. 
6) Exclusivity, which makes people or the opportunities presented to them, feel special either because of who they are, the group they belong to, or the way you value them, also motivates behavior.
7) Marketers can employ exclusivity in their communications by using VIP codes, restricted phone numbers or webpages, special discounts and offers, advance or exclusive access, status-conveying groups and membership tiers, badges and cards that offer recognition, personalized messaging, and words and phrases such as secret, sneak peek, just for, reserved, sourced from the top 1 percent, white glove, handcrafted, unique, unlike other companies, you’ve achieved, you’ve unlocked, you’ve been selected, and you have been invited. 
8) Urgency and exclusivity can be used separately or combined in an individual message or throughout an entire marketing campaign. 
9) Use the scarcity principle to prompt people to respond faster. 
10) Remember, make people feel special, or time-pressed, or both.






















4. The reciprocity principle and the marketing value of give to get


People don’t like to owe other people. When you do something for someone, they’ll want to find a way to pay you back. Research shows things as small as candies and cards can trigger reciprocity.
  

When the circumstances aren’t right for immediate reciprocation, humans remember their obligations and are expected to honor them later.
“We are uncomfortable and even a bit anxious until we discharge or repay the debt.”
“We may be willing to agree to perform a larger favor than we received, merely to relieve ourselves of the psychological burden of debt.”


CASE STUDY 
Using the reciprocity principle to win back customers How do you reengage someone who has stopped doing business with you?


MISTAKE 
Attempting to trigger reciprocity by offering a gift in return for completing an action. While that can be effective, it is simply providing an incentive. To trigger reciprocity, make your gift unconditional.


Direct marketing is an ideal channel for reciprocity
When selecting what to send, take care to make it relate back to the product or service you offer. If you sell hiking shoes, a map of trails in your target’s geographic area would be a good tie-in—whether in a print or digital version. If you offer chiropractic services, a laminated card illustrating several beneficial stretches would make sense. If you sell social media consulting services to businesses, a downloadable guide detailing the specs for the most popular platforms could be a welcome gift.


 If charities who measure every penny continue to send them, we can assume they continue to work.


More ways you can use the reciprocity principle in your marketing
● Email a series of weekly tips to your customers and prospects that will help them accomplish their business or personal goals. 
● Send a regular e-newsletter that curates information that will appeal to your target, that will keep them current about a shared interest, or that includes content that you have created specifically for them. 
● Consider not gating at least some of the resources on your website, so your prospects and customers can access tools and advice that they’ll find valuable. 
● Send reminders so that people don’t miss important deadlines (example: a car company could remind people when their vehicle’s inspection sticker needs to be renewed, or a travel company could remind people when their passports are nearing the expiration date).
Offer free samples, free trials, complimentary assessments or evaluations, and other useful lead magnets. 
● Reduce or remove friction in a process, which can make you the preferred provider choice among your competitors. 
● Take the time and effort to be extra helpful to your customers; show you’re interested in them. 
● Surprise customers with a credit, discount, or secret sale. 
● In B2B, recommend or refer other companies you work with, and put links to their content in the materials you publish. 
● Recognize your customers’ birthdays, anniversaries and other achievements with a small, unexpected gift or a warm acknowledgment. 
● Provide content that delivers a short entertainment break in your target’s day. 
● Create a library of how-to videos that your customers and prospects can refer to.








KEY TAKEAWAYS 


1) Humans are hardwired to return favors. 
2) People feel obligated to you if you first do something for them, whether or not they asked for it. 
3) The larger the gift that someone receives, the stronger their urge is to reciprocate. 
4­) To get out from under the obligation, people will sometimes reciprocate with an even bigger favor. 
5) Marketers can use the give to get approach to prompt business. 
6) Direct marketers and charity fundraisers have seen considerable success when they include gifts in their campaigns. 
7) Surprising a customer with an unexpected gift can focus that customer’s attention and make them more likely to remember you, leading to increased loyalty and retention. 
8) Content marketers can leverage a give to get approach by providing information and assets that educate or entertain. 
9) Marketers should offer content that is genuinely useful and not widely available. 
10) E-newsletters, ungated content, timely reminders, complimentary assessments, unexpected gifts, and helpful resources can all trigger the reciprocity principle.






































5. Social proof: harnessing the power of people like us, and the people we like


Check almost any reference on good copywriting for marketers, and you’re bound to find one of these three words: relevant, customized, and personalized. In fact, you may find all three of them. 
That’s why the old adage “the right message, to the right person, at the right time” is so often quoted.
Imagine this scenario. You’re in the initial phases of speaking with a company about doing business with them. The representative there offers you a gift and says, “Here is a little something we’ve selected just for you.” That feels nice. It feels personalized. 
They will look for ways to feel they are making a good choice, that they will fit in, and that no one, including themselves, can accuse them of picking the wrong product, service or company.
When people are uncertain, they assume others know more than they do. As a result, it seems like a smart move to make the same choices those other people made. Since making the wrong choice could potentially be harmful, people will take a “safety in numbers” approach. “I’ll have what she’s having” is the decision your customers will make. Why? It will give them a sense of confidence that they are not making a wrong move.


In a Chinese restaurant chain, researchers randomly placed one of two placards on the tables. One half “named the top-five most popular dishes from the previous week; the other half listed five sample dishes that were not identified as being popular.” Researchers found that the demand for the top five most popular dishes “increased by an average of about 13 to 20 percent.” The sample dishes, however, did not see increased demand. When a dish was described as popular, it actually became more popular.


Social proof isn’t always about following the crowd. Sometimes people think that others actually know more than they do.


People can instinctively feel safer when following the crowd. People apparently “assume that if a lot of people are doing the same thing, they must know something we don’t.”




A counterintuitive application of social proof
Szot was writing an infomercial for a client, and actually added some friction—as well as some social proof—to one of her scripts. She replaced the stock call-to-action line “Operators are waiting. Please call now” with “If operators are busy, please call again.”. The answer, as you might have guessed, is social proof.


CASE STUDY: How social proof sold hard-to-sell insurance
Where the creative team landed was actually an avenue that felt even more personal. They customized the headline by using the target’s name, age, and the field in which they worked. The line delivered the information that people like them who were in their age range and occupation had purchased these policies. The campaign, which also included other elements of behavioral science, was a big success. It exceeded all the client’s benchmarks. Most notably, it delivered double-digit increases in enrollments and in premiums per employee.


Smart ways to use social proof in marketing
● Feature a customer testimonial, and make sure the testimonial giver is similar to the testimonial reader (example: they live in the same general area or work in the same industry). For the testimonial to be most effective, choose one in which the customer admits some earlier hesitation or skepticism before revealing your product was a great choice. While “Acme products are really wonderful” is a good testimonial, an even better one is “I thought all of these products were pretty much the same, but then I switched to Acme. Their products are really wonderful.” When a prospective customer reads a testimonial like this, their reaction is, “That’s exactly what I was thinking—aren’t all of these products basically the same? But I guess they’re not. I should go with Acme.” 
● Provide case studies and a list of satisfied customers. 
● Highlight the number of users, subscribers, retweets, views, likes, followers, downloads, etc. you have. 
● Use descriptions such as: popular choice, fastest-growing, most requested, best-selling, previously sold out, expected to sell out, and back in stock (these last three can also trigger urgency or loss aversion, as noted in Chapters 2 and 3). 
● In B2B, show client logos and logos of professional associations you’re associated with, as well as a list of industries and customer titles you serve. 
● When appropriate, mention the number of years you’ve been in business or how much your company has expanded since starting. 
● Use language such as: most people, many people, people like you, people in Massachusetts, other professionals in accounting, and people who also like golf. 
● Highlight positive ratings, and keep in mind that a Northwestern University study (Collinger and Malthouse, 2015) found that “A shopper is more likely to purchase a product with an average star rating between 4.2 and 4.5 than one with a 5-star rating.” The thinking is the less than perfect rating is more believable. 
● Tell people that customers like them also purchased certain other items. 
● Tap into brand ambassadors and social media influencers. 
● Flag the number of a product sold, the number of people currently looking at it online, or the percentage sold out. 
● Choose reassuring modifiers such as often, typically, usually, generally, and common. 
● Market to affinity groups. 
● Encourage referrals from your customers.




­KEY TAKEAWAYS 
1) When people are not sure of what to do, they’d rather feel confident than special. 
2) People who are uncertain will follow the lead of others who are similar to them. 
3) Social proof helps reassure customers they are making a good decision.
4) Social proof also helps cue people about how they should behave. 
5) When a person sees other people doing something, that person often assumes those other people know something they don’t.
6) Marketing can trigger social proof by pointing out that a large number of people already do something, or that people who are similar to your target do. 
7) When using social proof, take care not to inadvertently leave people with the opposite message (that more people are doing something you don’t want your target to do). 
8) In addition to following the lead of people like themselves, people will also follow the lead of people they like. 
9) When using celebrities, be aware of the associated costs and the fact that if the celebrity experiences a sudden scandal, it can hurt your brand. 
10) Testimonials, case studies, customer lists, ratings, referrals, labels such as popular and back in stock, and words and phrases such as often and people like you and often can all trigger social proof.


6. Storytelling: increasing consumer involvement and engagement
Neuroeconomist Paul Zak puts it this way: “When you want to motivate, persuade, or be remembered, start with a story of human struggle and eventual triumph. It will capture people’s hearts—by first attracting their brains” (Zak, 2014).


Tim Ash, author of Unleash Your Primal Brain: Demystifying how we think and why we act, notes the powerful effect stories have on humans. He says, “Consuming stories influences our beliefs, teaches us facts, alters our future behaviors, and changes our personalities.... They [stories] effortlessly bypass logical and conscious defenses, and shape our closely guarded core beliefs” (emphasis mine).


Neuroscientist Uri Hasson has studied the effects of stories on humans. In his words, “A story is the only way to activate parts in the brain so that a listener turns the story into their own idea and experience”. 


Stories can literally put you and your customers on the same wavelength. Additionally, stories have the ability to create empathy and emotional connections. 


As your customers get more involved in your story, they undergo a process called narrative transportation. They are transported into the world of the story’s characters, and they experience what those characters are feeling. For example, they can feel stress, fear, frustration, anger, dread or any of the emotions someone may feel when encountering the problem your product can solve. Similarly, they can also feel pride, relief, happiness, confidence, delight or any of the emotions that come with solving a problem using your product. Since emotions drive decisions, and marketers seek decisions, creating communications that prompt people to experience emotion is very important (see Chapter 1). The stories you tell can make people feel what you need them to in order to make a purchase.




What makes a good story? 
In order for a marketer to tell a good story, you need to move beyond facts, features, benefits, and statistics. Instead, you want to paint a mental picture for your customers and prospects, involve their emotions, and make them care. In order to do that, follow these guidelines: 
● Start strong—make sure you grab the attention of your audience. 
● Choose a subject that they will find interesting and compelling. Hint: it’s not about what you’re selling, it’s about what the product you’re selling can do for the person who buys it. 
● Remember that good stories are relatable and forge connections. As Rohit Bhargava writes in his Nonobvious Guide to Marketing & Branding Without a Big Budget, “People trust stories they can relate to.” 
● Choose specific nouns and powerful verbs that help readers envision the action. My high school writing teacher used to say there was a big difference between “Sam True smoked” and “Sam True ate cigars.” He was right. 
● Write in an active versus passive voice.
● You can structure your story to follow the dramatic arc: exposition, rising action, climax, falling action, and resolution.




9 proven ways for marketers to use storytelling 
Your story can appear in a number of formats—written in an email or social post, featured on your website, captured on video, recounted in a tv commercial, radio spot, print ad or direct mail piece. 
Similarly, your story can serve a variety of needs. For example: 
● You can use a story in order to broach a difficult or delicate topic. PooPourri is a product that people spray in the toilet bowl before using the bathroom in order to prevent odors. Not necessarily a topic that is comfortable to talk about. They created a humorous video story about a girl having dinner with her boyfriend’s family to demonstrate the need for, and use of, the product. It received over 14 million views on YouTube. 
● You can tell the story of how your company came to be. Life is Good is an apparel company, best known for their fun t-shirts. Their founder’s story is featured on their website, with the headline “One van. Two brothers. Three simple words.” It tells the story of the two Jacobs brothers, who were selling t-shirts they designed out of a secondhand van, and how when they started printing shirts with optimistic sayings, their business took off.
● There are also disruptor stories—stories of companies, products, or services that changed the way we do business. Think about Tesla, Amazon, Uber, Netflix, Lemonade, and others, and the stories they tell about why they exist. 
● Birth of a product stories can also make excellent marketing content. Post-it® Notes from 3M are a good example. A scientist is trying to invent stronger adhesives and instead invents one that’s weaker. He shares his discovery with his colleagues and keeps trying to find a use for it. One day, a colleague is frustrated that the scraps of paper he uses to mark pages in his church choir hymnal keep falling out, and the rest is history. 
● Some brands use stories to promote their corporate social responsibility. For example, the shoe company Toms invests one-third of its profits for grassroots good. Hearing that story likely sways some people to shop with them over their competitors. 
● Product usage stories can be very powerful, whether they introduce a new product, feature different ways to use an existing product, or highlight customers telling a story about their use of a product, similar to my story about the Reliefband. 
● You can also tell “customer as hero” stories, accounts of how your customer succeeded with the help of your product. For example, imagine you sell employee health plans to companies. You can, as one company I know did, tell the story of a human resources executive who, after choosing your insurance, commented it was the only time in her career that employees didn’t complain about having a new plan. Telling a story like this is more impactful and memorable than a marketer simply stating that their product is highly rated by customers. 
● If you’re in a commodity or competitive marketplace, tell your single differentiator story. Find the one story you can talk about that sets you apart, even if it is only ancillary to what you sell. For example, the Magic Castle Hotel in Los Angeles has a red popsicle hotline phone by their modest swimming pool. When guests pick it up, a gloved server arrives with a tray bearing a free ice pop. This story of what makes them different also makes them popular. 
● Finally, stories that define a company’s standard of customer service can be very powerful and very effective. Years ago, I heard the story of a young guest who left a teddy bear behind at a Grand Hyatt in Hawaii. Not only did the hotel find the bear and ship it back, they sent pictures of it enjoying its “extended stay” at the resort. That effort to go above and beyond communicates so much, and makes the story both emotional and memorable.










KEY TAKEAWAYS 
1) Stories are engaging, entertaining, and the way information was passed from person to person before the written word. 
2) The human brain is hardwired for stories. It uses them to make sense of the world. 
3) Stories are more memorable than facts. 
4) Stories allow people to come to their own conclusions. While people may argue with what others tell them, they usually don’t argue with themselves. This makes storytelling a smart strategy when dealing with skeptical prospects you’d like to win over. 
5) The brain processes stories differently than data and statistics. More parts of the brain get activated when hearing or reading a story. As a result, people understand the information better and remember it longer. 
6) Stories impact people’s beliefs and their behaviors, making them useful for building brands and for motivating response. 
7) According to neuroscientist Uri Hasson, “A story is the only way to activate parts in the brain so that a listener turns the story into their own idea and experience.” As a marketer, you can plant your ideas into the minds of your target using a story. 
8) Listening to a story can prompt neural coupling, when the brain waves of the storyteller and the listener sync up. 
9) Stories also cause narrative transportation, pulling readers in so that they feel what the characters are feeling. They generate empathy and create emotional connections. 
10) When engaged in a story, a person’s brain releases the hormones dopamine, oxytocin, and cortisol, which can aid the buying decision. 
11) Research proves stories can add value to an item. 
12) Stories take advantage of the Zeigarnik Effect, the human tendency to remember incomplete things and want to finish them. 
13) Good stories grab attention, are compelling and relatable, include specific details and powerful verbs, and often follow the dramatic arc structure. 
14) You can tell various stories, including a founder’s story, a birth of a product story, a customer as hero story, your single differentiator story, and a customer service story














7.  Autonomy bias: harnessing the human need for control
Marketers who can give their customers some sense of control, including the opportunity to co-create or to make choices, will appeal to those customers. However, providing too much choice, or providing choices that are not easily distinguishable from one another, can put off customers and produce a negative effect on response.


“Four words that double persuasion.” “but you are free”.
“the choice is yours,”“it’s up to you”


“You’re facing an important decision and if you don’t act quickly someone else will decide for you.” (AT&T letter)


More smart ways for marketers to use autonomy bias:
● Use empowering language such as “Take control,” “Puts you in control,” and “Regain control.” 
● Invite customers to choose what they want—their free gift, level of service, type of rewards, or degree of product functionality
● Consider a slogan that highlights control (example: Burger King’s famous “Have it your way”). 
● Let customers customize certain aspects of their purchase, like the color or design. This act of co-creation can activate autonomy bias as well as the endowment effect (See Chapter 2). 
● Offer two or three product or service level options instead of just one. 
● Make sure the choices you provide represent clear, easily distinguishable options. If people cannot easily differentiate between choices, that can prevent them from making a decision. 
● Use color, position, and size to nudge people to make your desired decision when you offer options. 
● Chunk similar items into groups or categories to reduce choice overload. 
● Highlight your most important features or choices and provide dropdown menus or links for others. 
● Employ the illusion of choice, where you offer two options that both result in a positive sales outcome (example: Would you like to buy the blue or the green coat? Would you like to take delivery on Thursday or Friday?). 
● Where applicable, display progress bars to remove uncertainty about how much time something will take or how much more information a person needs to complete, because this knowledge will give them a sense of control. 
● Avoid undue friction and dark patterns (example: making it deliberately difficult to cancel a subscription), which can make people feel they have no control. 
● Give customers control through back buttons, undo buttons, and confirm before purchase buttons. 
● Provide easy-to-access assistance and guidance (example: phone, text, email, FAQs, assessment tools, usage examples representing different personas) to make customers feel in control as they make buying decisions.


KEY TAKEAWAYS 
1) People have an innate need to feel in control and make decisions about things that affect them. 
2) Giving customers choices makes them feel in control. 
3) Presenting a single option can delay or even prevent a purchase decision. 
4) Research shows having a second option increases the likelihood someone will purchase at that time. 
5) Asking for action, and then reminding people they are free to do what they want (the BYAF technique), can increase the likelihood people will do what you’ve asked. 
6) As the world emerges from the restrictions of the pandemic, triggering autonomy bias may be an even more important tactic for marketers. 
7) You can trigger autonomy bias by making customers and prospects feel in control, by informing them they are about to lose the ability to make a decision themselves, by offering people choices, and by highlighting aspects of your product or service that naturally hand control to customers, especially if your competitors can’t make the same claims. 
8) Marketers can charge more for products and services that give people more control. 
9) While choice can prompt decisions, too many choices (choice overload) can prompt indecision. 
10) Marketers tap into autonomy bias when they use empowering language such as “regain control” and “choose,” offer several options instead of one, allow customers to make customization decisions, and remove friction to make it easy for people to accomplish a task.


8. Encouraging sales and loyalty through the consistency principle and the Zeigarnik effect
Once people make a decision, they typically remain consistent with it as a way to conserve mental energy. That means if marketers can get one “yes,” they are more likely to get subsequent ones.


Social scientists have found that once people take an action or take a stand, they like to remain consistent with it.


Other powerful ways for marketers to use commitment, consistency, and the Zeigarnik and Ovsiankina effects:


● Invite people to take a poll or survey prior to asking them to purchase. 
● Encourage follows, likes, retweets, and views, which are easy ways to say yes. 
● Ask for other low-commitment first steps—such as download a white paper or guide, watch a short video, or sign up for an e-newsletter. 
● Encourage potential customers to pre-register their interest before your product comes out or before your event registration is open. 
● Offer trial memberships, starter kits of your products, and free limited functionality versions of your service. This will not only activate the endowment effect (see Chapter 2), it can also trigger the commitment and consistency principle, paving the way for your next ask. 
● Let people “test drive” or try before they buy. 
● Offer a satisfaction guarantee or return policy that will encourage people to make a purchase. 
● Remind people they previously said yes to you or made a smart decision by buying from you. Once they’ve made the commitment, they’re more apt to keep it. 
● Point out how a prospect’s values are in sync with yours or how your product supports what they care about. 
● Get your target to sign a petition, or to publicly register their interest or support. 
● Send abandoned cart emails, return to finish messages, or alerts that something your prospect viewed is now on sale/running low in stock/just added a new feature, color, or size. 
● Market add-on products that complement a recent purchase, and upgrades to services you offer. 
● Retarget prospects who spent time on your website but left without purchasing. 
● Use softer language that doesn’t sound final and decisive (which can scare people off), such as try vs. subscribe, or get started vs. buy, or take the next step vs. enroll.




KEY TAKEAWAYS 
1) Once your customers make a decision or take a stand, they like to remain consistent with it. 
2) Defaulting to consistent decisions saves mental energy and avoids the appearance of being a flip-flopper. 
3) A small commitment from your customers can pave the way for larger ones. 
4) Having someone make a plan for how they’ll do something increases the chances that they’ll follow through. 
5) Prompt someone to first say they’re feeling good before delivering a fundraising request.
6) Point out where your customers’ values align with those of your company to foster commitment and consistency. 
7) Start with a smaller, low-commitment request from your customers. Get that first small yes and then escalate your asks. 
8) Use language that reminds people that they’ve already said yes to you in the past. 
9) Ask your customer to answer a question or sign a pledge to gain an initial commitment. 
10) Once people publicly state something, they’ll adjust their behavior to match it in order to avoid cognitive dissonance. People like what they say and do to sync up. 
11) Use the power of the Zeigarnik effect by reminding customers of incomplete purchases, abandoned shopping carts, and additional steps they still need to take to finish something they’ve started. 
12) Letting customers try your product or service will make them more likely to purchase it. Once they purchase, offer add-ons and upgrades.




















9. Information gap theory: prompting consumers to take action through curiosity and the need to know


People’s need to find out what they want to know can be extremely motivating. Marketers can use their target’s hardwired urge to find answers as a powerful tool to prompt engagement.
People feel good when they satisfy their curiosity. It actually activates the brain’s reward center.


A well-crafted question is a smart way to trigger the effect of informationgap theory.
The term information gap theory refers to the fact that if there is a gap between what people already know and what they still want to know, they will take action to close that gap.


                                                          
1. Relevant, attractive benefit: “how fixed index annuities provide automatic cash in retirement.” It offered a relevant, attractive benefit. However, we worried that the target, who was likely unfamiliar with the term fixed index annuities, might not think the message was mean for them.
2. “Did you overlook this time-tested option for your retirement savings?” It had a nice nod to loss aversion (see Chapter 2), and a solid amount of intrigue. given that the audience profiled as being less financially experienced, however, we feared they’d assume they probably had indeed overlooked a number of financial opportunities. But because they weren’t “big money people,” they would have already made their peace with that.
3. Finally, we found the information-gap theory question we believed would do the job. we created a campaign that revolved around “Could you earn better returns than a CD and still protect your retirement cash?” This referenced a bank product, a certificate of deposit, that our target would be familiar with. It flagged two goals they likely had—making and protecting money for their retirement. And it highlighted a meaningful gap in the target’s knowledge. What's more, it worked, with the client reporting an 85x return on their marketing investment.                                
MISTAKE: Posing questions your prospect already knows the answer to. Instead, intrigue them with a question about a topic they have some knowledge of, but are neither experts in nor utterly unfamiliar with. 


Powerful ways for marketers to use information-gap theory and novelty:
● Start headlines, subject lines, teaser copy, and bullet points with the words: who, what, where, when, why, or how. Journalists use this technique to attract readership. It works for marketers, too. Robert Bly, author of How to Double Your Response Rates at Half the Cost, refers to them as fascinations—ultra-specific bullets that get your target to read further and order.
● When using the 5 Ws + 1 H technique (above), make sure your copy appeals to your target. For example, “Why we provide great service” is not as compelling as “How you can expect to be treated.”
● Tee up an information gap using superlatives, such as the best, worst, most, last, biggest, only, etc. Keep in mind that an Outbrain study found that negative superlatives outperform positive superlatives.
● Begin a story but delay the conclusion to prompt people to continue reading.
● Use ellipses in your subject line (example: And the winner is...). A May 2021 study by Worldata finds this tactic can lift email opening rates by 31 percent for B2B marketers, and by 28 percent for B2C marketers (Worldata, 2022).
● Pique people’s curiosity by posing a question or challenging their assump- tions. Consider taking a contrarian view.
● Invite your target to interact with an app or game that will reveal something about themselves, a subject you can count on people to be interested in.
● Create a quiz that lets people measure their knowledge about a favorite topic.
● Use a numbered list (example: Top 10 SaaS Providers) to offer information.
● Pop the word “new” in your headlines, titles, subject lines, and teasers. You can also use other words in the “new” family, such as introducing, announc- ing, now, finally, soon, innovative, debuting, latest, emerging, never before seen, and at last. For a verb, choose discover over learn, because learn sounds arduous and discover suggests fun.
● Lead off your communications with what’s new. Don’t bury news.
● Use violators, labels, and other visual cues to flag new products, features,
and extensions so people can easily spot them.
● Create a separate area on your website or in your marketing communica- tions to highlight your new offerings.
● Find and market new uses for your existing products.


KEY TAKEAWAYS
1) If there’s a gap in people’s information, they will take action to close it.
2) People are motivated to satisfy their curiosity because it is rewarding.
3) when people are about to discover something new, their brains release dopamine, which produces a pleasant feeling. Humans are hardwired to seek information.
4) Marketers who tee up an information gap in their communications should pay it off. do not mislead or resort to clickbait because that can backfire.
5) when highlighting an information gap, choose a topic your target knows something about, but is not deeply familiar with.
6) Frame the information you want to present in a way that piques your audience’s curiosity.
7) Your customers and prospects will be drawn to the new and novel.
8) novelty can spur interest, attraction, and purchase decisions.
9) trigger an information gap by using the 5 ws and 1 H, superlatives, numbered lists, questions, quizzes, challenging statements, and delayed payoffs.
10) Use terms such as new, announcing, finally, soon, never before seen, and discover to signal novelty. Flag new products and new uses for products. lead with what’s new.



Reference: Using behavioral science in marketing (Nancy Harhut, 2022)
